---
layout: post
published: true
id: tag:www.patater.com,2005-07-22:/nes-asm-tutorials/day-21
permalink: /nes-asm-tutorials/day-21
title: Day 21 - The Stack
author: Mike Huber
date: 2005-07-22 00:20:00
updated: 2010-12-19 03:36:44
sitemappriority: 0.5
categories: nes-asm-tutorials
tags: nes-asm-tutorials nes assembly tutorial
language: en
---
<h2>The Stack</h2>
<p>I hope you know what a stack is. It's exactly what it sounds like, you put
things on top (push) and then you take things off the top (pop). The stack in
the NES starts at $01FF and grows down in memory. To handle where the next item
pushed or poped from the stack comes from, there a register called S which is
an index in page 1 ($0100 to $01FF). The S register can modified by a TSX or
TXS instruction (Transfer S to X and transfer X to S respectively). The current
location on the stack always is $0100+S.</p>

<h2>Push Instructions</h2>
<p>There are 2 instructions that explicitly push things on the stack, they are
PHA and PHP. PHA pushes the A register onto the stack and then decrements the S
register. PHP pushes the flag register (that stores Zero,Carry,Overflow, etc..)
onto the stack (and S-=1;). Note that there are no instructions to push the X
or Y registers, to accomplish that. You'll have to do something like:</p>
<code class="block">
; assuming you don't care about A's value
    txa ; transfer X to A
    pha ; push A
; or
    tya ; transfer Y to A
    pha ; push A
</code>


<h3>Pop Instructions</h3>
<p>The counter-parts to the push instructions are PLA and PLP. PLA pops A from
the stack and PLP pops the flags from the stack (both do S+=1; afterwards).</p>
<code class="block">
; example:
    lda #3
    pha
    lda #4
    pha
    lda #5
    pla ; note that this is a POP
    pla
</code>


<p>After that is finished A's value will be 3.</p>

<p>NOTE: PHP and PLP would be usefull in preserving flag status across subroutine calls (JSR).</p>

<p>NOTE2: I don't think JSR saves the flags, does it?</p>

<h3>This Day In Review</h3>

<p>The stack is a good thing to know and is probably something I should have
mentioned earlier.</p>

<p>
    Greetings and Salutations!,<br/>
        - GbaGuy
</p>

<p>P.S. Could someone email me to tell me if this works or not, please?</p>

<div class="series-navigation">
<a href="/nes-asm-tutorials">Intro</a> - <a href="/nes-asm-tutorials/day-22">Day 22</a>
</div>
