---
layout: post
published: true
id: tag:www.patater.com,2005-07-22:/nes-asm-tutorials/day-17
permalink: /nes-asm-tutorials/day-17
title: Day 17 - The Sprite Attribute Byte
author: Mike Huber
date: 2005-07-22 00:16:00
updated: 2010-12-19 03:36:44
sitemappriority: 0.5
categories: nes-asm-tutorials
tags: nes-asm-tutorials nes assembly tutorial
language: en
---
<h2>The What?</h2>
<p>The Sprite Attribute Byte (SAB) is the third (of 4bytes) byte that you write
to OAM (SPR-RAM). This byte controls several (4) things including:</p>
<dl>
    <dt>Bits 0-1</dt><dd> 2 Bits of the sprites colors. Will be discussed at a later time.</dd>
    <dt>Bits 2-4</dt><dd> UNUSED.</dd>
    <dt>Bit #5</dt><dd> 0 = Sprite in front or 1 = Sprite in back of BG.</dd>
    <dt>Bit #6</dt><dd> 1 = Flip horizontally.</dd>
    <dt>Bit #7</dt><dd> 1 = Flip vertically.</dd>
</dl>

<p>See's see how to do this!</p>

<h2>Gettin' Goin'</h2>
<p>When I demonstrate each bit (with code <u>peices</u>) I'll give 2 pieces, of
code, one for the $2003/$2004 method and one for the Sprite#-BYTE (DMA)
method.</p>

<p>To flip a sprite horizontally, you just need to set bit #6 of the special byte
of OAM data (the third byte written). Assuming you have your special byte in A (you
have to, to be able to do bit operations & math):</p>
<code class="block">
    eor #%01000000  ; will toggle bit #6 in A.
    sta $2004       ; this assumes that you already entered 2 bytes to $2004
</code>

<p>Now the DMA method:</p>
<code class="block">
    lda Sprite1_S
    eor #%01000000
    sta Sprite1_S   ; need to store it back so next time the correct thing happens.
    sta $2004
</code>

<p>As you see, it's not much different.
To flip a sprite vertically, you need to toggle bit #7 of the special byte.</p>

<h3>Gettin' Goin'</h3>
<p>Putting sprites <em>behind</em> backgrounds is always cool if you do it right,
like the Warp Whisle (Whistle?) in Super Mario Bros. 3 ((c)1988? Nintendo, wow I was
1 year old in 1988...) you have to get BEHIND the background and make to the end of
the stage to get the whisle, remember that?</p>

<p>Well, Bit #5 of the special byte is probably how that was done. Just make Bit #5
a 1 to have your sprite be drawn under/behind the background. Example of toggling bit
#5:</p>
<code class="block">
    eor #%00100000
</code>

<p>That will toggle bit #5, so you can use that instead of the eor in the previous code.</p>

<h3>One Last Thing</h3>

<p>Remember that you can always toggle more than one bit at a time.</p>

<h3>This Day In Review</h3>

<p>Hopefully I'll get around to talking about color attributes tomorrow.
(Bits 0-1 of special byte and the BG Attribute Tables).</p>

<p>
    Hope you liked this!,<br/>
        -Mike H a.k.a GbaGuy
</p>

<p>
P.S. Could someone email me to tell me if this works or not, please?
</p>

<div class="series-navigation">
<a href="/nes-asm-tutorials">Intro</a> - <a href="/nes-asm-tutorials/day-18">Day 18</a>
</div>
