---
layout: post
published: true
id: tag:www.patater.com,2005-07-22:/nes-asm-tutorials/day-18
permalink: /nes-asm-tutorials/day-18
title: Day 18 - BG Scrolling
author: Mike Huber
date: 2005-07-22 00:17:00
updated: 2010-12-19 03:36:44
sitemappriority: 0.5
categories: nes-asm-tutorials
tags: nes-asm-tutorials nes assembly tutorial
language: en
---
<h2>How?</h2>
<p>I had already done some experimenting to see how exactly background scrolling
works. It appears that (without a mapper) you can only scroll in the direction that
you are (possibly aren't?) having mirroring (the ".inesmir 1" we always use).</p>

<h2>Registers?</h2>
<p>The background scroll <em>port</em> is $2005, I call it a port instead of a
register because, even though it takes 2 writes, those two writes aren't used as
one big number like in other registers and do two different things.</p>

<p>The first write to $2005 will be the vertical scroll and the second write
will be the horizontal scroll (according to <a
href="http://fms.komkon.org/EMUL8/NES.html">Fayzullin's doc</a>).</p>

<h3>Some things...</h3>
<p>Unless you set-up your cartridge (.NES file) to have the 2Kb needed to use
all 4 Name Tables (which I don't <em>yet</em> know how to do), it seems that
you can only scroll a certain way. If anyone knows how it scrolls vs. mirroring
or how to use all 4 Name Tables, please <a
href="mailto:vbnetprogramer@hotmail.com">E-Mail</a> me.</p>

<p>You will know that you are possibly scrolling the wrong way if the
background moves funky or possibly disappears (happened to me).</p>

<h3>No Code?</h3>
<p>I'd like for you people to actually try and do it yourselves, if you do,
feel free to send me some code. I know that you can do it, you have all the
info you need.  If enough people complain or even if enough people send me
code, I'll put my code up here...</p>

<p>Seriously, you can do it. The basic things you need are:</p>
<ol>
    <li>Variables for Vertical and Horizontal scroll.</li>
    <li>Have atleast a simple background displayed.</li>
    <li>Handle keypad presses (up,down,left,right).</li>
    <li>Write vert. and hori. scroll to $2005</li>
</ol>

<h3>This Day In Review</h3>

<p>I've decided that tomorrow will <em>definitely</em> be about loading up to
like 64KB easily (we will use the method to load the Zelda title screen
(1KB)).</p>

<p>
    Happy Coding!,<br/>
        -Mike H a.k.a GbaGuy
</p>

<div class="series-navigation">
<a href="/nes-asm-tutorials">Intro</a> - <a href="/nes-asm-tutorials/day-19">Day 19</a>
</div>
