---
layout: post
published: true
permalink: /manual/
id: tag:www.patater.com,2007-11-12:/manual/
title: Introduction to Nintendo DS Programming
shorttitle: Intro to Nintendo DS Manual
author: Jaeden Amero
date: 2007-11-12 22:34:24
updated: 2024-07-06 11:31:36
sitemappriority: 0.7
tags: project nds nintendo nintendo-ds tutorial manual
description: An up and coming manual produced by yours truly, Patater
featured: true
language: en
thumb: /images/thumb-manual.png
graphic: /images/rocket-code.png
graphicalt: Orange Spaceship flying over code
download: /projects/manual.zip
downloadstring: Download the Manual with Source Code
filetype: zip
---
<p>This is the modest and lowly Introduction to Nintendo DS manual, the
supreme source for beginner knowledge on programming the Nintendo
DS.</p>
<!--break-->

<h2>About</h2>
<p>This manual covers topics including the legality of homebrew and the
politics behind it, displaying backgrounds on both screens, sprites,
and a bit of game mechanics.</p>

<h2>Change Log</h2>
<ul>
<li>Version 7.0 - The manual is now MdBook formatted, and the VRAM appendix is
back!</li>
<li>Version 6.1 - This manual has been updated for use with libnds
1.3.1.</li>
<li>Version 6.0 - This manual now covers additional aspects of Nintendo
DS Programming including multiple sprites, multiple backgrounds,
multiple palettes, the touch screen, Slot-1 devices, and more. The
manual's case study has undergone a significant rewrite and covers more
ground than ever before.</li>
<li>Version 5.0 - Made Editing improvements. Manual is now DocBook
formatted.</li>
<li>Version 4.0 - Added VRAM Appendix and updated page layout</li>
<li>Version 3.0 - Added a sound chapter</li>
<li>Version 2.1-2.2 - Various typo fixes</li>
<li>Version 2.0 - Finalized many chapters and improved code</li>
</ul>

<h2>Help</h2>
<p>Need help with anything in this manual? Have any suggestions for
improving the manual? <a
href="https://github.com/Patater/manual-git/issues">Raise an issue on
GitHub.</a> </p>

<h2>Read Online</h2>
<p>Read <a href="/manual-git/">Introduction to Nintendo DS Programming</a> online.
</p>

<h2>Visit Us on GitHub</h2>
<p>We could use your help in making the manual better. Patches are welcome. <a href="https://github.com/Patater/manual">Check us out on GitHub.</a></p>
